

--- Page 41 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
040210 - All decisions on deferment or withholding of increment and
stoppage of salaries shall be communicated to the Office of the
Accountant General of the Federation, Office of the Auditor-General  for
the Federation and Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the
Federation as well as to the Officer concerned within two weeks.Communication
of Deferred or
Withheld
Increments.

--- Page 42 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
050101
CHAPTER  5
PERFORMANCE  MANAGEMENT  SYSTEM
SECTION 1. - PROGRESS  REPORT ON OFFICERS ON PROBATION
SECTION 2- PERFORMANCE  MANAGEMENT  SYSTEM FOR SERVING OFFICERS
SECTION 3. – ANNUAL PERFORMANCE  MANAGEMENT  TIMELINE
SECTION 4 - PERFORMANCE  MANAGEMENT  CYCLE
SECTION 5. - APPRAISALS  FOR EMPLOYEES  ON APPROVED  ABSENCE
SECTION 6. - PERFORMANCE  APPRAISAL  COMMITTEE
SECTION 7. - MONITORING  AND EVALUATION
SECTION 1- PROGRESS REPORTS ON OFFICERS ON
PROBATION
050101 - Progress reports are meant to provide in respect of
Officers on probation or initial contract, a full record of each
Officer's work, conduct and capabilities on which to judge his
suitability for confirmation or reengagement (whichever is
appropriate) and to ensure that in cases where an Officer's
suitability for continued employment is in doubt he is given
timely warning of his faults and reasonable opportunity to
correct them.
050102 - Permanent Secretaries/Heads  of Extra-Ministerial
Offices are responsible for rendering Progress Reports at
intervals of six months with effect from the date of first
appointment. The final Progress Report shall be rendered not
later than two months before an Officer's probationary  period or
second tour of the contract is due to expire.
050103 - If for any reason an Officer's probationary period is
due to expire at a time when he will be on leave, the final
Progress Report shall be rendered not later than two months
before he proceeds on such leave, in order that a decision as to
the confirmation, deferment  of confirmation or termination of his
appointment  may be taken and communicated  to him before his
departure. In the case of an Officer on contract, if an adverse
opinion of his suitability has been formed before progress report
is rendered not later than two months before he so proceeds on
such leave, it shall be communicated  to him before he departs
so that the Officer may have the opportunity of deciding beforeProgress Reports on
Officers on Probation
Rendering Progress
Reports
Progress Reports on
Officers before Leave

--- Page 43 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
he departs, whether, in the light of the adverse opinion already
formed, it is in his own interest to return.
050104 - Permanent Secretaries/Heads  of Extra-Ministerial
Offices shall address progress reports to the Permanent
Secretary, Federal Civil Service Commission or the Permanent
Secretary Career Management Office as appropriate under
personal and confidential cover. The final Progress Report
rendered after 21 months' service shall include a definite
recommendation as to whether the Officer's appointment
should be confirmed or terminated or whether his contract
should be renewed.
SECTION 2.- PERFORMANCE  MANAGEMENT  SYSTEM
FOR SERVING OFFICERS
050201.-The  Performance Management  System (PMS) shall
replace the Annual Performance Evaluation Report (APER) for
the Federal Public Service. All Federal Ministries, Extra-
Ministerial Departments  and Agencies (MDAs) are expected to
comply with the provisions of this rule.Final Progress Report
Accountability for PMS
050202. - (a) PMS shall be the tool by which goals and Definition
objectives shall be set for employees and individual
performance is tracked, assessed and reported upon in the
Federal Public Service.
(b) The Performance  Management  System (PMS) shall focus
on the measurable output (performance  objectives and targets)
of employees, as well as specified competencies i.e. the
knowledge,  skills and personal attributes needed to deliver job
tasks and meet agreed targets. Performance  Management  and
training shall be result oriented.
050203 - It is essential for the general efficiency of the Service
that Annual Reports on Officers shall be detailed and candid.
Reporting Officers must realize that their own capabilities are
discernible from the reports they write on their subordinates,
bearing in mind that they hold their Offices as much by virtue of
their administrative  as well as their professional  abilities.
050204 - A Reporting Officer must not only be at least one
substantive grade above the Officer being reported on, but also
be the immediate Superior  Officer under whom the Officer being
reported on directly works.  Where an officer has served in more
than one Department before his report is rendered, theResponsibility  of
Reporting Officer
Who to Report

--- Page 44 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
Reporting Officer shall be the immediate Superior Officer under
whom he worked for the substantial part of the normal period a
report shall cover. It is necessary that a countersigning Officer
should assess every report judiciously before countersigning.
050205.- The substance of any adverse comment on an
Officer's work or conduct included in a report shall be conveyed
to him in writing by the reporting Permanent Secretary/Head  of
Extra-Ministerial Office in sympathetic terms and with the
objective of enabling and encouraging him to overcome his
short-comings.  The fact that this action has been taken shall be
stated in the report itself. A copy of the letter addressed to the
Officer as well as a copy of his acknowledgement  should be
attached to the Report.
050206 - When an Officer is seconded to another Ministry/Extra
Ministerial Office, the Permanent Secretary/Head  of the Extra-
Ministerial Office to which he is seconded is responsible for
furnishing the reports on the Officer.
050207 - Arrangements shall be made with Corporations,
States or State-owned Companies to which Officers are
seconded to furnish the reports on the Officers so seconded as
though such bodies were Government Departments.  It shall be
the responsibility of the Permanent Secretary/Head of Extra-
Ministerial Office from which an Officer has been seconded to
request the Corporation, State or State-owned company
concerned, two months before the due date, to furnish the
required report, on appropriate annual Report Forms which
shall be supplied to the establishment  for this purpose.How to Report
Report
during Secondment
Reports
from Corporations
and States
SECTION 3. - ANNUAL PERFORMANCE  MANAGEMENT
TIMELINE
050301. - Performance Management Cycle shall run from
January to December of every year, and shall commence
immediately  after the leadership  of each MDA has finalized their
annual institutional and departmental  goals and targets.
The annual goal of each established post shall be set by the
Department of Human Resource Management (HRM)inTimeline

--- Page 45 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
icollaboration  with Department/Units  in the MDAs. In this regard,
the following shall be strictly adhered to:
measurement of periodic performance, appraisal
processes will be used to determine how a staff has
performed within a calendar  year;
ii. Key Performance  Indicators (KPIs) shall be drawn and
agreed upon by January of each year and final appraisal
shall be done by December of the same year; and
iv. Employee's performance results shall be the primary
basis for determining employee development  options,
rewards, sanctions and other associated actions.
SECTION 4. - PERFORMANCE  MANAGEMENT  CYCLE:
050401:-The  Accounting  Officer of every Federal Public Service
Institution shall be responsible for ensuring the successful
implementation  of the PMS across all levels of officers.
(i) The Accounting Officer shall be responsible for
execution of annual PMS cycle processes.
(ii) Accounting Officer shall ensure that appropriate
complaints handling processes related to the annual
performance management  cycle are in place.
(iii)The Director HRM shall prepare Annual Performance
Management  Reports for the Accounting Officer at the
end of each cycle, and shall also coordinate efforts for
determining reward and recognition, incentives,
development and other associated recommendations
for each individual based on demonstrated and rated
performance.
050402. Рerformance  Planning:
i.Individual Performance Planning shall be done at
the beginning of the Performance Management
Cycle.
ii.Job Descriptions (JDs) shall be available for each
job, and used to capture detailed job contents
including scope, responsibilities,  reporting lines, etc.
Performance expectations shall be based on the
contents of JD.
Performance  expectations  shall be agreed between
the Accounting Officers and each head of
department, which shall be cascaded downwardsAccountability  for
Performance
Management Process
and Results
Performance Planning

--- Page 46 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
iv.
V.until Annual Performance Goals and Targets have
been set for all employees in each MDA.
These agreements,  which consist of challenging but
achievable tasks and performance targets derived
from each MDAs' strategic objectives and plans
shall be documented in the Performance Planning
Form, which shall be signed off by both the
supervisor and his direct reports.
The supervisor and the employee shall also agree
on the work performance actions, i.e. the detailed
actions required to achieve the targets and support
requirements.  The aim of this is to ensure that the
employee understands the work that needs to be
done and that the supervisor has clarity of the
support he is meant to provide to each direct report
to enable work performance.
050403. - Performance  Monitoring
i. Agreed tasks and targets of employees will be
subject to regular and critical performance  reviews,
via appraiser/appraisee  discussions to be held
throughout the year in a process called
Performance  monitoring.
iii.
iv.Performance Monitoring shall be a continuous,
interactive and transparent process. It shall serve
as an honest, supportive and developmental
exercise between an employee and his immediate
supervisor.
Performance  Monitoring shall be the responsibility
of the immediate supervisor with whom the
employee has had sufficient contact. A second
opinion and endorsement of employees'
performance monitoring assessments shall be
required from the next direct supervisor.
Performance Monitoring discussions shall be
captured in the Monthly Performance Dialogue
Form, and the Quarterly Performance Review
Form.
050404. Performance Appraisals shall be done to evaluate
progress with achievement of targets on a periodic basis.
Performance Appraisals shall include self-appraisals and
further appraisal by a Supervisor, or such individual saddledPerformance
Monitoring
Performance  Appraisals

--- Page 47 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
with this responsibility. The performance appraisal exercise
shall be an interactive and transparent process, between the
employee and his immediate supervisor.
(i) Performance appraisals are ongoing activities
throughout the year, culminating in an annual end-of-
year formal meeting to review the overall progress of
employees' performance against their set objectives
and targets.
(ii)Towards the end of the Annual Performance Year,
formal performance evaluations of individual employees
(Appraisee) shall be carried out by the (Appraiser) in
order to:
a) discuss the appraisee's performance  over the past year;
b) identify training and development  needs;
c) address any other work-related issues;
d) review individual's career aspirations;  and
e) identify further support needed by the Appraisee.
iiiOutcomes from the appraisal process shall be
documented  in the End of Year Performance  Appraisal Form.
iv Employees will receive appraisal training to support their
roles either as an Appraisee, and/or as an Appraiser where
applicable.
050405. - Performance  Rewards
i. There shall be a clear link between Performance
Management outcomes/results  and rewards. This
shall be a key component  of the PMS.
ii. Employee performance shall largely be used in
determining rewards and recognition prescribed in
chapter six (6) of the PSR.
iii. Performance incentives or bonuses shall be paid after
the annual performance appraisal results have been
fully signed off by the Accounting Officers of respective
MDAS, and the Head of the Civil Service of the
Federation.
iv.Outcomes from Performance Management  processes
shall serve as input for identifying performance gap-
closure actions that include training and other forms of
development.
v. Promotion decisions for deserving officers shall rely on
demonstrated performance captured in performance
appraisal results in addition to the requirements asPerformance
Rewards

--- Page 48 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
vi.specified in extant promotion policies and guidelines of
the Federal Civil Service Commission.
Performance appraisal results shall also, where
applicable,  feed into the implementation  of Performance
Improvement  Plans or other consequences  for under-
performing individuals.
Underperformance
050406- (i) Underperformance  is defined as an appraisal
outcome which is below average and/or not considered to be in
line with expectation  for respective  job roles.
(ii)All underperformance  shall be treated on a case-by-case
basis.
(iii)
(iv)Should an employee's  performance  become  a matter of
concern, Appraisers must take action promptly to gain
an understanding of root causes via the periodic
performance monitoring conversations during which
they shall also proffer help.
Appraisers are required to do everything possible to
ensure Appraisees feel well supported throughout the
annual performance cycle, and in cases where
performance issues are of a very serious nature. In
addition, Performance  Improvement  Plan (PIP) process
shall be adopted.
(v) Employees required to undergo performance
improvement  actions shall be notified in writing through
a confidential process.
(vi) Gap closure interventions  shall be jointly agreed by the
Appraiser and Appraisee, and captured in the
Performance  Improvement  Plan.
(vii) Implementation  of the PIP actions shall be coordinated
by the Director HRM in collaboration with the
Appraisers.
(viii)During, and at the end of a Performance Improvement
Plan/Process  period, individuals shall be given formal
feedback on the status of their performance - whether
significant improvements have been noted in their
performance, warranting substantive retention in their
current jobs, or if other actions are warranted. Such
actions or decisions shall be determined by theUnderperformance

--- Page 49 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
Performance  Appraisal Committee and shared with the
individual.
SECTION 5- APPRAISALS FOR EMPLOYEES ON
APPROVED  ABSENCE
050501- (i) Employees that have been away on approved
absence for a part of the performance period shall have a review
session with their Supervisor upon their return to work, during
which they shall set/review  their performance  targets for the rest
of the year.
(ii)
theThe rest of the performance management process steps
shall then be applied throughout the remainder of
performance  period.
SECTION 6 - PERFORMANCE  APPRAISAL BY JUNIOR
STAFF COMMITTEE (JSC) AND SENIOR STAFF
COMMITTEE  (SSC)
050601 (i) The Senior Staff Committee and Junior Staff
Committees of MDAs, shall in addition to its responsibility  for
appointment, promotion and discipline, review and manage
outcomes of annual performance appraisals for members of
staff. However, escalated cases would be referred to the
Appraisal Committee of OHCSF/ FCSC for resolution.
(ii)The Committees shall ensure that appraisals are fair,
objective and effectively  capture demonstrated  performance  as
measured against specified annual performance expectations
or targets.
(iii) The detailed criteria and weighting for appraisal of officers
shall be as specified in the Guidelines to the Performance
Management  Policy.
(iv) Appraisal  of Officers shall be conducted  in strict confidence
and shall comply with Employee Personal Data Privacy
Protection Rules and Guidelines.
(iv) The Committees  shall meet from time to time to attend
to Performance  Appraisal  related matters.Appraisals for
Employees on
Approved Absence
Appraisal by JSC and
SSC
SECTION 7 MONITORING  AND EVALUATION
050701:- In order to ensure compliance, Performance Monitoring and
Management  practice at all levels in the Federal Public Service, Evaluation

--- Page 50 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
shall be monitored regularly for feedback and improvement  by
the Central Coordinating  body.
050702: - The Central Coordinating Body responsible for Coordinating Body
monitoring effectiveness of the performance management
process shall be domiciled in the OHCSF.
050703: -All records generated during any of the phases of the
annual Performance Management cycle are, and shall remain
the property of the Federal Government of Nigeria. All such
records shall be administered in line with good administrative
document and data management  practices.Record Management