

--- Page 31 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
Chapter 2
021212: - Four months before the date of expiration of agreement, the
person engaged shall give a written notice to Government  stating desire to
remain in its employment  and Government  shall thereupon decide whether
it will offer him further employment. If Government  decides in favour, his
re-engagement  shall be on such terms and for such a period as may be
mutually agreed.
021213: - The person engaged will be eligible for a severance allowance
on the satisfactory completion of a tour of service at the rate of 15% of his
basic salary provided that his engagement  is not terminated  as under rule
021210 above and provided that he is not in receipt of, nor eligible for, any
other retiring benefits.
021214: - While leave of absence is not a legal right included in the
Contract, the person engaged, after a tour of service,  or if declared invalid
before completing  the tour, or his engagement  is terminated by reason of
ill-health in accordance  with the provisions of rule 021207 hereto, leave
may be granted under the rules in force from time to time, applicable to
Nigerian officers of a similar grade level so far as exigencies of the Public
Service permit.Further
Employment
Severance
allowance.
Leave.

--- Page 32 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
SECTION 1. - GENERALCHAPTER 3
PRESCRIBED  EXAMINATION  FOR CONFIRMATION
SECTION 2. -COMPULSORY  CONFIRMATION/PROMOTION  EXAMINATIONS
SECTION 3. - COMPULSORY  EXAMINATIONS  FOR JUNIOR OFFICERS
SECTION 4. - COMPULSORY  EXAMINATIONS  FOR POLICE AND PARA-MILITARY
OFFICERS
SECTION 5 - OFFICERS REQUIRED TO PASS THE EXAMINATIONS
SECTION 6. - FEES FOR INVIGILATORS  AND EXAMINERS
SECTION 1: - GENERAL
030101: - (i) All officers on joining the Service shall undergo an
induction training course. In addition, they shall be expected to pass
the prescribed confirmation examination  as follows:
(a) Compulsory  Confirmation  Examination for Senior Officers;
(b)Compulsory  Confirmation/Promotion  Examination  for Junior
Officers;
030102: It is the responsibility  of the Career  Management  Office (CМО)
in the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation to
conduct  and supervise the examination.
030103: There shall be established,  an Examination Board which
shall be responsible for the conduct and supervision of the
examinations.  The Board shall comprise the following:Compulsory
Confirmation
Examinations.
Responsibility  for
Conduct and
Supervision of
Examinations.
Examination
Board.
(a) Permanent  Secretary,  CMO (OHCSF)
(b) Director, Organization  Design and
Development  Department,  (OHCSF)Chairman
Member
(c) Director (Promotion)  Federal Civil
Service CommissionMember
(d) Director (HRM) Federal Ministry of
EducationMember
(e) Director (HRM) Federal Ministry of
JusticeMember
(f) Director (HRM) Federal Ministry of
Communications  and Digital EconomyMember
(g) Director (HRM)Office  of the Accountant
General of the FederationMember

--- Page 33 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
(h) Director, Learning and Development, Secretary
Department  (OHCSF)
(i) Any other line Ministry/Office  a
particular examination  may relate toMember
030104: - An Officer who fails the examination after three consecutive
attempts shall by virtue of such failures be required to resign or
withdraw from the service. The Permanent Secretary (CMO) Office of
the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation shall ensure
compliance.
030105:- An Officer who fails to take the confirmation examination
after 3 years of first appointment  shall be required to resign from the
service. All officers must take the confirmation examination within two
years from the date of taking up their appointments in the Ministry/
Extra-Ministerial  Office.
030106:- Confirmation  examination shall be held once a year.
030107: - During the confirmation  examination an Officer is allowed to
make reference to the Public Service reference books or any other
related sources of information. However, textbooks and reference
books are not allowed for the examinations  in the General  Paper, Office
Procedure/Routine  or Special Paper.
030108: - The reference books for confirmation examination in the
Ministry/Extra-Ministerial  Office are;
(a)
(b)GL. 06 and below- Public Service Rules, Financial Regulations,
Civil Service Handbook, Federal Establishment Circulars,
Notes for Guidance Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
GL. 07 and above- Public Service Rules, Financial Regulations,
Civil Service Handbook, Federal Establishment Circulars,
Notes for Guidance Nos. 1, 2 and 5 etc
030109:- An Administrative Officer/Professional  who possess law
qualification obtained from a Nigerian University or has been called to
the Nigerian Bar shall be exempted from taking Group A of the
examination.Failure to Pass
Confirmation
Examination.
Failure to Take
Confirmation
Examination.
Frequency  of
Examinations.
Use of Text Books
at Confirmation
Examination.
Reference Books
Allowed to be
Used in
Confirmation
Examination.
Exemption of Law
Professionals

--- Page 34 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
SECTION 2: COMPULSORY  CONFIRMATION  EXAMINATIONS
FOR SENIOR EXECUTIVE  OFFICERS,  ADMINISTRATIVE
OFFICERS  AND PROFESSIONALS  (COMPRO  I & III)
030201:- The following are the prescribed  examinations  for Senior
Executive Officers, Administrative  Officers/Professionals,  except
otherwise reviewed.
GROUP A-LAW EXAMINATION
030202: - The examination consists of two papers, on the following
subjects:
1. (a)Nigerian Legal System;
(b) Ministerial  Government  Procedure  based on;
i. Lagos (Administrative  and Executive Functions)
Act No. 1 of 1958
ii. Ministers' Statutory Powers and Duties
(Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act, Cap. 228, Laws of
the Federation of Nigeria, 1990
iii. Federal Capital Territory Act of chapter 6- Laws of
the Federation of Nigeria, 2004.
iv. Legislative Houses (Powers and Privileges) Act
Cap. 208, Laws of Federation of Nigeria, 1990
v. Transfer of Functions (Lagos) Order L.N.257 of
1959
vi. Transfer of Functions (Federation) Order
L.N.258 of 1959.
vii. Chapter VI, part 1, Section A of the
Constitution of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria, 1999.
2The main provisions of the following legislations
aThe Constitution  of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999;Officers who are
required to pass
Syllabus for the
Examination

--- Page 35 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
Chapter
447b The following chapters of the Laws of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, 1990 and the subsidiary legislation
made there under:
Title of Act
Commission  and Tribunals of Inquiry Act
513 Illiterates Protection Act
192 Interpretation  Act
331 Notaries Public Act.
333 Oaths Act, 1963
335 Official Secrets Act, 1962
503 Federal Capital Territory Act
IV of the 1999
ConstitutionFundamental  Human Rights.
VIII Part I of 1999 Federal  Capital Territory.
Constitution.
GROUP В - ЕХАMINATION  IN OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS  AND
OTHER SUBJECT  AREAS
The examination  consists of the following subjects:
i. Public Service Rules (PSR)
ii.Financial Regulations
iii. Computer Appreciation  and Literacy
iv.General  Paper
v. Criminal Law (Police & Para-Military Officers only) & Common
Law (Civilians only)
vi. Police Orders and Instructions (for Police Officers only)
vii.Police Practical Duties (for Police Officers only)
viii. Customs Orders and Instructions (for Customs Officers only)
ix.Customs Practical Duties (for Customs Officers only)
x. Correctional  (Prisons) Orders and Instructions (for Correctional
(Prisons) Officers only)
xi. Correctional (Prisons) Practical Duties (for Correctional
Officers only)
xii. Immigration Orders and Instructions (for Immigration Officers
only)
xiii. Immigration Practical Duties (for Immigration Officers only)
xiv. Civil Defence Orders and Instructions (for Civil Defence
Officers only)
xv. Civil Defence Practical Duties (for Civil Defence Officers only)
xvi. Road Safety Orders and Instructions (for Road Safety Officers
only)

--- Page 36 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
xvii. Road Safety Practical Duties (for Road Safety Officers only)
xviii. Fire Service Orders and Instructions (for Fire Service Officers
only)
xix. Fire Service Practical Duties (for Fire Service Officers only)
GROUP С - ЕХАMINATION  ON COMPUTER  APPRECIATION  AND
LITERACY
SECTION 3: COMPULSORY  CONFIRMATION/PROMOTION
EXAMINATIONS  FOR JUNIOR OFFICERS  (COMPRO II)
030301; - The following are the prescribed subjects for junior
Officers:
(i) Public Service Rules (PSR)
(ii) Financial Regulations
(iii) Computer Appreciation  and Literacy
(iv) General Paper
(v) English Language;
(vi) Office Routine/Special  Paper; and
(vii) Elementary  Mathematics  - For Clerical  Assistants on GL. 03 only
030302:- Pass at Accelerated Level:
Only Clerical Officers on GL04 whose performance  in the examination
is exceptional are considered to have passed at accelerated level.
Such Officers are to be automatically  advanced to GL06 only after the
successful completion of a one (1) year training for the Certificate in
Supervisory General Management (CSGM) in the Federal Training
Centers and conversion to the Executive Officer Cadre is then effected.
SECTION 4: POLICE AND PARA-MILITARY  SERVICES
CONFIRMATION/PROMOTION  EXAMINATIONS
030401;-Officers  required to pass the Examinations:
a)Unconfirmed  Senior Police Officers; and
b) Unconfirmed  Para-Military  Officers (Senior and Junior).Subjects for Junior
Officers
Pass at
Accelerated Level
Officers Required
to Pass the Exam.

--- Page 37 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
SECTION 5: OFFICERS  WHO ARE REQUIRED  TO PASS THE
COMPULSORY  CONFIRMATION  EXAMINATIONS
030501: Unless exempted by the Government  the following Senior Officers Required
Executive Officers/Administrative  Officers/Professionals  are required to pass the
pass the examinations within two years of taking up their Examination
appointments  in the Federal Public Service.to
a. Senior Executive Officers, Administrative
b.Officers/Professionals  appointed direct to the Federal Public
Service on first appointment. Officers eligible for the
examinations must have served for six (6) months after taking
up their appointments.
Senior Executive Officers, Administrative Officers/
Professionals  promoted from unconfirmed  junior posts.
c. Senior Executive Officers, Administrative Officers/
Professionals  transferred  from other scheduled Service who at
the date of transfer are under the age of forty years and have
not satisfied conditions for confirmation.
d.For further advancement  beyond GL. 10 officers shall attend
Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON), Public
Service Institute of Nigeria (PSIN), Centre for Management
Development (CMD) or any other approved institutions and
pass the prescribed examination.
030502; - Where Gazette of 1st Appointment and Confirmation of
Appointment  are not available within two years, COMPRO examination
result should be used in its place.
SECTION 6:- FEES FOR INVIGILATORS  AND EXAMINERS
030601: Fees shall be paid to examiners and invigilators at rates
determined from time to time by the Office of the Head of the Civil
Service of the Federation.Use of COMPRO
Result
Examination Fees.

--- Page 38 ---

040101Federal Government  Public Service Rules
Chapter 4
EMOLUMENTS  AND INCREMENTS
SECTION 1: - EMOLUMENTS
SECTION 2: - INCREMENT  RULES
SECTION 1:- EMOLUMENTS
040101: - Financial Regulations contain guidance on the payment of
emoluments and wages.
040102: - On first appointment, emolument  shall, as a general rule be
paid as from the date of assumption of duty. All Officers shall be placed
on IPPIS platform within two months of assumption of duty.
040103: - A staff on transfer shall be eligible for the emolument attached
to his new office with effect from the date he assumes duty.
040104: - Except in a case of a promotion from a non-pensionable  to a
pensionable office, the following rules shall apply where an officer is
promoted in the ordinary course within Federal Public Service to an Office
carrying emolument on an incremental scale:
(i)
(ii)If the Officer is promoted to a grade level that does not
overlap his old grade level, he will be placed at the minimum
point of his new salary grade level.
If his emolument in the former post is higher than the
minimum point of the new salary grade level, he will be
placed on the next point, higher than his former emolument
after taking into consideration the increment he would have
earned if he had not been promoted.
(iii) payment  of promotion arrears shall be made within the year
promotion is effected.Payment of
Emoluments.
Emoluments
on
Appointment.
Emoluments
on Transfer
from Other
Scheduled
Services.
Emoluments
on Promotion
Within
Incremental
Scales.

--- Page 39 ---

040201Federal Government  Public Service Rules
Chapter 4
SECTION 2:- INCREMENT  RULES
040201: - Increment is a predetermined amount added to the annual Definition.
emolument  of an Officer every calendar year.
040202: - An Officer on an incremental  grade level shall normally be
granted an increment unless he is on interdiction/suspension  or has a
disciplinary action pending against him or on account of poor
performance.
DEFERRING  AND WITHHOLDING  OF INCREMENTS
040203:- The incremental  date of an Officer appointed or promoted to a
post in the Federal Public Service shall be 1st January of the year following
at least six months of service or promotion.
040204: - The grant of an increment may be deferred or withheld in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 040205 and 040206. In deciding
which penalty to impose or recommend,  a Permanent Secretary/Head  of
Extra-Ministerial Office will take into account the gravity of the
shortcoming and the quality of the officer's previous service, bearing in
mind that to withhold an increment is a more serious penalty than to defer
it.
040205: - An Officer's increment is deferred when the decision as to
whether or not it shall be granted is postponed for a specific period. The
period must be fixed at the time the increment is deferred and must not
be less than three months nor more than six months. If less than six
months in the first instance, it may, if necessary, be increased to six
months by additional specific deferment. If a deferred increment is
eventually granted it does not become effective until the day following the
expiration of the specific period of deferment. However, the recipient
retains his original incremental date for subsequent increments. If a
deferred increment  is not granted at or before  the expiration of six months
from the date it was originally  due it must be withheld.Earned
Increments.
Incremental
Date.
Ground for
Withholding
or Deferring
Increments.
Deferred
Increment.

--- Page 40 ---

040206Federal Government  Public Service Rules
Chapter 4
For example, if an Officer who is due to proceed from N147,968 to
N152,950 per annum on 1/1/2005 had his increment deferred for three
months his salary shall remain at N147,968 until 31/3/2005 when his
Permanent Secretary/Head of Extra-Ministerial Office must decide
whether or not to grant the deferred increment. If he grants it, the Officer
draws monthly emolument at N152,950 for the period 1/4/2005 to
31/12/2005 (i.e. the remaining nine months) and retains his original
incremental date of 1st January for consideration  of his next increment  to
N157,932.
040206: - An Officer's increment is withheld when it is decided not to
grant it and that he shall cease to be eligible thereof until his next
incremental date. The withholding of an increment thus results in the
emolument of the Officer in question remaining for the rest of his
incremental  service years one increment  behind what it would have been
had the increment not been withheld (unless the Federal Civil Service
Commission exercises the authority described in Rule 040209).
Example:  - An Officer due to proceed from N147,968 to N152,950
per annum on 1-1-2005 had his increment withheld. His emolument
should remain at N147,968 throughout the period 1/1/2005 to
31/12/2005  and he cannot proceed to N152,950 until 1/1/2006, his next
incremental date.
040207: - An increment deferred or withheld cannot be restored with
retrospective effect in consequence of improved service during a later
increment  earning period.
040208: - Immediately  on deciding to restore an increment, which had
earlier been withdrawn or deferred, the Permanent Secretary/Head of
Extra- Ministerial Office should bring the decision to the notice of the
Officer.
040209:- When an Officer's increment has been withheld under Rule
040206 the Federal Civil Service Commission may at a subsequent
incremental  date grant one or more special increments having the effects
of raising the salary of the Officer to or towards the level it would have
reached if the previous withholding has not occurred.Withheld
Increment.
Increment not
Restored in
Retrospect.
Notice to
Restore
Increment.
Special
Increments to
Mitigate lasting
effects of
Withheld
Increments