

--- Page 11 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
020307: - Transfer from one senior post to another or from one class to
another within the Federal Public Service requires the prior approval of the
Federal Civil Service Commission or appropriate board of relevant agency.
An Officer must have served for a minimum period of six (6) months in his
original Post before seeking transfer to another Post. An application for such
transfer must be submitted to the Permanent Secretary/Head of Extra-
Ministerial Office or Agency of the applicant and must state the applicant's
reasons for desiring a transfer and his qualifications for the work to be
undertaken. Such application should be forwarded to the Federal Civil
Service Commission by the Permanent  Secretary/Head  of Extra-Ministerial
Office together  with a statement as to:
(i) how applicant  has performed his duties;
(ii) whether  the applicant  is considered  to be well qualified for the post
desired; and
(iii) recommendations  as to the grant or refusal of the application.
SECTION 4: - SHORT TERM APPOINTMENTS
020401 There may be circumstances in which specialized skills or
new/emerging skills which may or may not have been prescribed in the
Schemes of Service are required in the Public Service. In order to fill the
observed gaps and/or to shore up the capacities of existing Officers,
appointments may be made for a prescribed period of time in the following
categories: Contract Appointments, Sabbatical Appointment, Career
Exchange Programme,  Talent Sourcing Strategy, Internship  and Volunteerism
in the Federal Service.
020402: A Contract Appointment  is temporary appointment  (which does not
provide for the payment of pension) to a post of the level to which appointment
is made by the Federal Civil Service Commission/  Governing Board in case of
Parastatals  and Agencies for a specific period as opposed to appointment  on
pensionable terms. A contract appointment must be recorded in a formal
document of agreement.
020403 - Contract appointment  may be offered;
i) if it is established that the Service no longer has Officers with specific skills, as
provided in the approved Schemes of Service that can perform the related
functions;
(ii) based on the circumstances  arising from emerging cadres, courses,  skills and
the creation of new ones as well as prevailing reality;
(iii) be tied to funded projects/programmes  with specified life span;
(iv) to expatriates only when suitable Nigerians are not available;
(v) to Nigerians, if:
a) they are pensioners;
b) they are 50 years of age or over at the time they are being appointed;
c) they specifically request to be employed on contract terms and it is
deemed in the best interest of the Service; andTransfer
within the
Federal public
Service
Definition
Contract
Appointment
Types of
Contract
Appointments

--- Page 12 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
d) the candidate possesses specialized  competencies  or skills and provided
such posts are duly advertised in at least three national newspapers.
020404: - (i) The conditions of service of an Officer on a short-term appointment
are those provided for in his contract. The privileges, emoluments or allowances
described in these Rules do not apply to him unless they are so stated in the
contract itself. Any question of the interpretation of a contract affecting his
conditions of service should be referred to the Office of the Head of the Civil
Service of the Federation.
(ii) For non-Nigerians,  the provisions of the Public Service Rules regarding
contract appointments shall apply in all cases, except for those persons
married to Nigerians (see appendix G)
(iii) Spouses married to Nigerians should remain on contract until granted
Nigerian citizenship  before being considered  for permanent  appointment
(see appendix  G)
020405: PROCEDURE  FOR PROCESSING  CONTRACT  APPOINTMENT
(i) MDAs through their SSC are to undertake  identification  of required
skills and defend the skills at the OHCSF whose responsibility  shall
be to work out and approve waiver for the desired skills;
(ii) The prospective  applicant must apply for such position through the
submission of a duly filled FCSC Form 2 as required, being a post
of the level which appointment  is made by the Commission;
(iii)FCSC shall ensure that contract appointment  is based on approved
waiver and skills identified. The Post to which contract appointment
shall be made must not be below SGL. 12;
(iv) Contract appointment  shall be based on merit through a fair, open
and competitive selection process and shall not jeopardize the
career prospects of serving Officers;
(v) In case of contract appointment  for non-Nigerians,  Government
shall undertake all immigration responsibilities (relevant
working/residence  permit);
(vi) All questions  of interpretations  of a contract appointment  affecting
the proposed employee's conditions of service should be referred
to the OHCSF and;
(vii)The duration of contract appointment  should be one (1) or two (2)
years and renewable  but not more than four (4) years in all
020406: RULES GUIDING THE CONDUCT OF AN OFFICER ON
CONTRACT  APPOINTMENT
i The contract Officer must, as part of his duties, be responsible  for
mentoring serving Officers as a condition for the offer of the
contract appointment;
ii Contract Officer shall sign an undertaking to accept posting or
transfer to any part of the country;
iii Officers appointed on contract shall be subject to performance
appraisal through confidential report as applicable in the Service
and;Circumstance
s that may
warrant offer
of Contract
Appointment
Procedure

--- Page 13 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
iv Contract staff must sign the oath of secrecy in line with PSR 020210
Termination
Contract020407:  - (a) An appointment  on contract may be terminated by the
Government  at any time in accordance  with the terms specified in the
contract itself. A recommendation to the Federal Civil Service
Commission  for the termination of the appointment  of a contract Officer of
shall be accompanied by a full statement of the consideration  which
has prompted it. On receipt of the recommendation,  the Federal Civil
Service Commission shall decide whether the appointment  should be
terminated forthwith in accordance with the terms of the contract or
whether the Officer should be offered an opportunity, to submit any
formal representation  if he so wishes before a final decision is taken.
(b) The termination of a contract appointment  by the holder is subject to
the terms of the contract and any question concerning the waiving of
any of the penalty under  a contract agreement shall be referred to the
Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation.
020408: - An Officer serving on contract who desires re-engagement,  shall
so inform the government  in writing through the Permanent Secretary /Head
of Extra-Ministerial  Office not less than four months before his leave is due. In
the absence of such notification,  it may be assumed that an Officer serving on
contract does not desire re-engagement.
020409: - On receipt of such notification expressing an Officer's wish to be
re-engaged, the Permanent Secretary/Head  of Extra-Ministerial Office
shall obtain the consent of the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the
Federation to the re-engagement  before forwarding recommendation  to the
Federal Civil Service Commission enclosing an up-to-date confidential report
on the Officer (unless such report has been forwarded within the previous two
months). In reply the Permanent  Secretary/Head  of Extra-Ministerial  Office will
receive any of the following: -
(a) authority to inform the Officer that arrangements  will be made to offer
him re-engagement  during the course of his leave and the details of
the terms proposed. The Permanent Secretary/Head of Extra-
Ministerial Office shall inform the Officer accordingly without delay;
(b) the original and duplicate of the re-engagement  contract duly signed
on behalf of government. In this case, the Permanent Secretary/Head
of Extra-Ministerial Office shall obtain the Officer's witnessed
signature to both copies, deliver the duplicate to the Officer, and
return the original to the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the
Federation.Appointment.
Re-
engagement
(Responsibilit
y of Contract
Staff)
Re-
engagement
(Responsibilit
y of
Permanent
Secretary)
020410: - As soon as it is clear to the Permanent  Secretary/Head  of Extra- Earlier
Ministerial Office that he will be unable, for whatever reasons, to recommend Notification
the re-engagement  of an Officer serving on contract, he will seek the approvalof

--- Page 14 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
of the Federal Civil Service Commission to inform the Officer that he will not Non-Re
be re-engaged and, on receipt of such approval, will inform the Officer without Engagement
delay.
020411: Provided re-engagement  is completed by the signing of a new
contract before the end of vacation leave granted under an expiring contract,
service under the new contract will be treated as continuous.
020412: - Where retired Officers from the Service are re-engaged into career
posts, the appointment  shall be on grade level immediately  below that on which
they retired and be eligible to maintain their last step at retirement. The
remuneration of non-Public/Civil  Servants shall be based on negotiable terms
by the parties concerned.
SABBATICAL  APPOINTMENTContinuity of
Contract
Service
Remuneration
on Contract
Appointment
020413: Sabbatical  Appointment  as it applies to the Service is the appointment
of an officer on GL 15 (or equivalent) and above, for the purpose of research Sabbatical
and professional  development  of the Officer. The appointment  shall be for a Appointment
period of 12 calendar months.
020414: Host MDA/Organization  shall be responsible  for the payment of the
travel expenses, lodging, and sundries while the parent MDA/Organization
will continue to pay the salary of the Officer for the duration of the leave.
INTERNSHIPRemuneration
on Sabbatical
Appointment
020415: Internship connotes a structured experience that relates to a
student's/graduate's  discipline or career goal and which helps to enhance Internship
academic, career, professional and personal development. Internship period
is to facilitate acquisition of practical skills, workplace experience and greater
knowledge of that profession.
VOLUNTEERISM
020416: Volunteerism  denotes a practice of offering one's time or talents for
charitable, educational, or other worthwhile activities, especially in one's
community.  Volunteers are driven by passion to leave a noble legacy of service
to humanity. In a nutshell, it is the sacrifice of time, skills or resources with the Volunteerism
aim of making a positive change either as an individual or group (formal or
informal).
020417: PROCEDURES FOR ENGAGEMENT OF INTERNS AND
VOLUNTEERS  INTO THE PUBLIC SERVICE
(i)Focal Office shall be established in the OHCSF to be responsible  for
identifying the fields/tasks available for volunteer programme and
disseminate  the information.  MDAs in supportive role are required to
establish Desks for the two programmes.

--- Page 15 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
(ii) The Focal Office shall upload skills highlighting benefits and
conditions of engagements, with requisite qualifications into the
website of OHCSF.
(iii) Prospective volunteers with specialty in preferred specified
fields/disciplines to apply for engagement in response to the
advertisement  in the OHCSF Website
(iv) Prospective  Volunteers must be certified medically  fit and suitable for
the assignment by a recognized Healthcare Provider (HCP) and
obtain security clearance from the Police before engagement.
(v) Interns to be engaged directly by MDAs shall  submit reference  letter
from their respective institutions.
(vi) Stipends paid to interns shall be at the rates prescribed by relevant
circulars issued from time to time.
(vii) Successful  candidates  shall be given letters of commendation  at the
end of the programmes.
020418: Interns shall be engaged for 3 to 6 months on part-time during an
academic session and for a period of not more than12 months on full-time,
while Volunteers shall be engaged for a maximum of 12 months at a time.
020419: Stipends for Volunteers  shall be in accordance  with the rate contained
in the National Volunteering Policy by the Office of Secretary to the
Government of the Federation. Host MDAs shall be responsible for the
payment of stipends to Volunteers during the period of their service.
020420 Interns must be postgraduates,  undergraduates,  or students in other
tertiary institutions  while volunteers must possess a University Degree, Higher
National Diploma (HND), National Certificate of Education (NCE), National
Diploma (ND) and Senior Secondary  School Certificate Examination  (SSCE).
020421: LEGAL FRAME WORK FOR PROCESSING  SHORT TERM
ENGAGEMENTS
(a) To ensure that due processes  are followed in the negotiation,  drafting and
execution of contracts of engagement by the parties on all the short term
appointments, the basic norm shall be that, the following Departments/Units
must be represented at the discussions:
(i) The Human Resources  Management;
(ii) The Finance and Accounts Department;
(iii) The User Department(s)/  Unit(s);
(iv) The Legal Unit; and
(v) Representation  shall be at the level of director.
(b) After negotiations,  a letter of appointment  shall be issued to the employee
duly endorsed  by Permanent  Secretary or Chief Executive indicating  the terms
of the contract of engagement  by the Parties.
The template of short-term engagement  is in Appendix G.Tenure for
Internship
and
Volunteerism
Remuneration
for Internship
and
Volunteerism
Qualification
for Interns
and
Volunteers

--- Page 16 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
SECTION 5:- TRANSFER  AND SECONDMENT
020501 - (a) Transfer is the permanent release of an Officer from one
scheduled Service to another or from one class to another within the
same Service.
(b) Secondment  means the temporary  release of an Officer to the service
of another Government approved body or any recognized
International  Organization or body for a specified period.Definition
020502: - The Authority to process
secondment:inter-service transfer and
(i) Applications  for Transfer/Secondment  to posts graded G.L 09
and below shall be considered by the appropriate committee of
the benefitting Ministry/Extra-Ministerial  Office and approved
by the Permanent Secretary/ Head of Extra-Ministerial  Office.
(ii) Application for Transfer/Secondment  to post graded GL.07-
10 in any Ministry/Extra-Ministerial  Office shall be determined by the
Federal Civil Service Commission. Officers seeking transfer from
scheduled Establishments  on Salary GL.07 - 10 are required to sit
for the Annual Competitive Civil Service Entry Examination.
020503: - The following procedures shall apply in processing transfer and
secondment
a) Confidential  reports covering the last three years (or whole
service if less than three years) of the officer's service shall be
furnished.
b) Officer on transfer from States to Federal Service shall be
placed on a grade level lower than his current grade level.
c) Transfer to the Federal Service shall be limited to posts graded
level 07 to 14 or its equivalent.
d) Officer on transfer/secondment  must have been confirmed and
his qualifications, experience and career progression are in
accordance with the Schemes of Service.
e) There must be evidence of concurrence to the transfer/
secondment  of Officers by the releasing and accepting agencies.
f) Secondment of an Officer(s) to the Service of another
Government, or approved body or recognized International
Organization  shall be for a maximum period of two years in the first
instance after which the Officer may apply for extension, seek for
transfer or return to his former post. All extensions must be
approved by the appropriate Committees and the Federal Civil
Service Commission/  Board. The total period of such secondment
must not exceed four (4) years.Authority to
process
Transfer/Seco
ndment
Procedure  for
Transfer/
Secondment

--- Page 17 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
g) if it is in the public interest to second an Officer to the Service
of another Government, approved body or recognized international
organization, the period of secondment shall not exceed six years.
h) During the period of secondment  the Officer shall continue to
hold his substantive post and be entitled to increment and
promotion and will be treated as having been posted on special
duty.
020504:- During the period of such secondment, the benefiting organization  shall
be responsible for the Officer's emoluments. However, where an Officer is
released on a secondment in public interest, and there is a differential in payments
between the releasing and receiving MDAs, the MDA with the higher pay shall be
responsible for the payment of the salary, notwithstanding, all non-salary
allowances shall be paid by receiving MDAs.
020505:- The emoluments and incremental date of an Officer on transfer is
governed by Rule 040103.
020506: - No applicant shall be considered for transfer-on-promotion  to any
MDA except in response to an advertised post.
020507 (i) An applicant shall be considered for transfer:
(a) If the MDA is satisfied that there are vacancies not only in the
relevant grade but also in the applicant's discipline or area of
specialty;
(b) provided the contemplated  transfer  would in no way jeopardize  the
promotion prospects of serving Officers;
(c) if he has been confirmed in his previous service and his
qualifications, experience and career progression are in
accordance with the Schemes of Service of the grade/ post; and
(d) if he has served in his current grade for the stipulated minimum
number of years prescribed for promotion to an advertised post.
(ii) No Ministry shall transfer/second  any senior Officer to any Parastatal  under
its supervision either as a take-off or at the request of the Agency without
approval  of the Federal Civil Service Commission/Board;
(iii.) No Ministry shall accept any staff seconded to it without the
endorsement  of the Federal Civil Service Commission/Board;
(iv.) Officer on secondment  shall be appraised by the MDA he is seconded
to.Payment of
Salary of
Staff on
Secondment
Salary on
Transfer.
Conditions
for transfer
020508: - Junior Posts - Transfer from one junior post to another within the Transfer on
Federal Public Service may be arranged,  with the consent of the Officers Junior Posts
being considered for transfer, at the mutual discretion of their Permanent
Secretary/  Heads of Extra-Ministerial  Offices.

--- Page 18 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
020509: - MDAs shall make quarterly returns to the Federal Civil Service Quarterly
Commission  and/or the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation returns
on the number of staff on transfer/secondment  to other Services. In the same
vein the Federal Civil Service Commission shall furnish MDAs on quarterly
basis the approved list of staff seconded/transferred  to other services.
SECTION 6: POSTING OF OFFICERS
020601:- Posting is the initial assignment  of an officer to position/job schedule
in an MDA or reassignment  to another position/job  schedule within or outside
his current MDA/Department.  Posting helps employees acquaint themselves
with the activities of various offices they are posted to and thereby gain wide
experiences on the intricacies of government business.
020602: - The following rules will guide posting of officers
i. All senior staff can be posted and/or redeployed to new post in
accordance with the approved employee mobility Policy;
ii.Posting of Officers to posts outside their Professional Cadres
prohibited.
iii. Posting of pool Officers in the Service shall be mandatory  after every
four (4) years.
iv.is
Failure of an Officer to proceed on posting shall be regarded as
misconduct and Ministries or Extra Ministerial Departments/  Agencies
who reject pool Officers deployed to them shall be made to face
appropriate sanctions.
020603: - In implementing  postings decision, fairness to all Officers shall be
an underlying principle in order to ensure that the system is not used as a tool
for coercion, punishment or cronyism. Consideration shall be given to the
following:
i.
ii.Posting does not result in the loss of institutional memory in any
Department,  Division or Unit nor impair its ability to continue to provide
quality service to both internal and external stakeholders;  and
Posting does not result in the loss of an employee involved in any
service-wide  project designated as high priority during the lifespan of
the project.
020604: - To ensure every employee is given the opportunity to acquire as
much of the "whole-service"  work experience as possible and to guide the
posting of pool staff, posting shall be done in line with the approved Employee
Mobility PolicyDefinition
Conditions for
Posting
Procedure  for
Posting
Guide to
Posting

--- Page 19 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
020605: -The Director HR shall be expected to submit a Report on compliance
to posting instructions to the relevant pool office within three weeks of the
release of the instruction.Duty of DHR
on Posting
020606: - Officers may seek for redress where he is of the opinion that his Posting
movement to another job/ location has not been done in line with the provision Complaints
of extant rules. Any complaints/grievances  with respect of posting instructions
should be submitted through appropriate channel within three working days
the posting is released.
020607: - The cost of entitlements  due to the employee  whose posting requires
a change of duty station shall be borne by the posting MDA.
020608: - An Officer who desires to live and work in the location where his
spouse lives shall be allowed to do so provided the branch of his MDA can be
found in the spouse's location and that there is relevant established post at the
branch. Government  shall not be responsible  for cost of relocating an Officer
whose posting is at his request.
020609: -The primary responsibility of all employees of the Federal
Government is to discharge the duties assigned by their employer to the
Nigerian public in a timely and efficient manner. Therefore, notwithstanding
involvement in staff union activities, officers are obligated to comply with the
provisions of extant circulars, PSR, etc. and obey all legitimate directives
issued by appropriate authorities;
020610: - Labour Union Executives  shall not be posted out of their MDAs until
the expiration of their tenure in office;
020611: - No Union Executive member at the expiration of tenure in office shall
decline redeployment,  posting or reassignment  of schedule of duties.
020612: Trade Unions/Staff  Associations are mandated to introduce tenure
limit of two (2) terms in their Constitutions.  The duration for each tenure shall
not be more than 2 years.Posting
Entitlements
Provision for
Posting to
Spouse's
location
Responsibility
of Union
Executives
Posting of
Union
Executives
Redeployment
of Past Union
Executives
Tenure/
Duration of
Union
Executive
SECTION 7: - ACTING APPOINTMENT
020701.-  Where it is necessary that a particular duty post (of status not
lower than SGL 14 Chief X Officer) should continue to be filled at a time
when no Officer of corresponding  substantive rank is available for posting
thereto, another Officer may, with the approval of the Federal Civil Service
Commission/  Board, be formally  appointed,  by notice in the gazette, to act
in the duty post and assume either fully or in part, the duties and
responsibilities  thereof.When
made

--- Page 20 ---

Federal Government  Public Service Rules
020702.  - The mere fact that the substantive  holder of a duty Post will be
absent therefrom for a short period (e.g. on casual leave or sick leave)
does not in itself justify an acting appointment;  there may however be
circumstances (such as compliance with statutory provisions) which
necessitate the making of an acting appointment for a relatively brief
period. The decision whether an acting appointment is necessary or
desirable in any particular case will rest with the Federal Civil Service
Commission/Board.
020703.  - Acting appointment  is not intended as a means of testing the
suitability  of Officers for promotion;  they will normally be made only in order
to fill posts that are temporarily  vacant and their duration should be limited
accordingly.
020704.  - (a) Recommendations  for acting appointment  which shall not
exceed a period of one year must be forwarded to the Federal Civil
Service Commission  on General Form 66 and must include thereon
a certificate to the effect that the acting Officer will assume the full
duties and responsibilities  of the post in question. Approved acting
appointment shall be gazetted by the Federal Civil Service
Commission but it will on no account be back-dated to a period in
excess of six months of the date of receipt of the recommendation
by the Commission.
(b) The period of acting appointment  shall not exceed one year, but in
exceptional  circumstances  may be extended for another one year.
020705: - The date on which an acting appointment  commences will be
indicated in the gazette notice authorizing the appointment. Normally, the
gazette date of commencement  will be that on which the acting Officer
takes over the duties and responsibilities  of the post, except that if he
takes over from the substantive holder the gazetted date of
commencement  will not be earlier than that on which the latter, after
handing over:
(a)
(b)
(c)leaves the station or the post;
takes over substantively or himself acts in another post in
the same station, or
commences vacation leave in the same station, whichever
is applicable  according to circumstances.
020706:The date on which an acting appointment ceases will be
indicated in the gazette notice reverting the Officer's appointment.
Normally, the gazetted date of cessation will be that on which the acting
Officer relinquishes the duties and responsibilities  of the post, except that
if he hands over to the substantive holder, the gazetted date of cessationNot made
unless
necessary.
Not a form
of trial for
Promotion
Procedure
Date of
Commencement
Date of
Cessation